---
title: How constant is a Zig const?
author: Etienne Spillemaeker
published: 2026-04-23
---

As someone with little previous exposure to statically typed languages, I was
confused about the `const` declarations you can find in Zig.


```zig
fn f(x: *u8, y: *const u8) struct { u8, u8 } {
    x.* += 1;
    return .{ x.*, y.* };
}

pub fn main() void {
    var a: u8 = 0;
    var b: u8 = 0;
    std.debug.print("f(&a, &b) => {}\n", .{f(&a, &b)});
}
```

This outputs `f(&a, &b) => .{ 1, 0 }` to stderr.

The function `f` accepts 2 arguments, both pointers, but the second argument
declares that the value it points to is `const`, meaning, the function will not
be able to mutate it. Trying to assign `y.* += 1;` would result in a compile
error: `cannot assign to constant`. Note that it is precisely the same error you
get if you try to assign `x = y`, as function arguments are implicitly `const`
in Zig.

Now, I have recently discovered that the previous paragraph is not technically
correct. We'll call the same `f` function slighly differently this time:

```zig
pub fn main() void {
    var c: u8 = 0;
    std.debug.print("f(&c, &c) => {}\n", .{f(&c, &c)});
}
```

This outputs `f(&c, &c) => .{ 1, 1 }` to stderr.

This time, `x` and `y` pointers refer to the same value, which is indeed
mutated! So what `y: *const u8` really means, is that the compiler will not let
you mutate the value _through_ `y`, not that the value it refers to is guaranted
to be constant. If there are interdependencies between your function arguments,
you could very well end up mutating your `*const` argument inside the function
body.

A `const` declaration does not affect any scope "above" the current scope.
Because of Zig coercion that allow going from var to const, you can rely on
const-ness flowing down in scopes. Well, _mostly_, because `@constCast` exists.

```zig
fn naughtyFunction(x: *const u8) void {
    const y = @constCast(x);
    y.* +|= 1;
}
```

`@constCast` "strips" the `const`ness of the pointer, so that the compiler lets
you use it to mutate the value it points to.

Demonstrating the effect of `@constCast` is not trivial:

```zig
pub fn main() void {
    const a: u8 = 0;
    std.debug.print("initial value of a, (&a).* => {}, {}\n", .{ a, (&a).* });
    naughtyFunction(&a);
    std.debug.print("final value of a, (&a).*   => {}, {}\n", .{ a, (&a).* });
}
```

This compiles, and will output `0, 0`, and then `0, 0` to stderr. It looks like
it didn't work. But something interesting happens when the initial value is
unknowable at compile time:

```zig
pub fn main(init: std.process.Init) void {
    var rand_buf: [1]u8 = undefined;
    init.io.random(&rand_buf);
    const a: u8 = rand_buf[0];
    std.debug.print("initial value of a, (&a).* => {}, {}\n", .{ a, (&a).* });
    naughtyFunction(&a);
    std.debug.print("final value of a, (&a).*   => {}, {}\n", .{ a, (&a).* });
}
```

Here, the initial value is a randomly generated byte, so a value between 0
and 255. When I ran this, 39 was selected, and the program output `39, 39`, and
then `39, 40`. So the value did change in the scope below, but that was not
reflected in the scope above. The compiler is not messing up here, `@constCast`
should be used with great care not to contradict the compiler's assumptions.
